[Music]
This is the vice president of the
Philippines.
She's threatening to kill the president
if she's killed. Even though Filipino
politics is known for high drama, this
was extraordinary.
>> Right now, the tensions have already
evolved into an open feud.
>> The political battle between President
Ferdinand Marcos Jr. and Vice President
Sarah Duterte is playing out like a
thriller. But there's more at stake than
meets the eye.
>> Filipinos understand the underdog
situation that they're in in terms of
geopolitics. The Philippines is on the
front line of China's territorial claims
in the South China Sea and would play a
major role in any US effort to counter a
possible Chinese invasion of Taiwan.
>> The Philippines is a key ally for the US
here in Asia. It is located in a very
strategic spot.
>> But this alliance is under pressure.
Assara Duterte backs closer ties with
China and her case is being helped by
aggressive US tariffs.
>> Well, President Trump says the US has
reached that trade deal with the
Philippines.
>> Trump's presidency has upended just
about every assumption you could have
about America and the world.
>> The Philippines sits in the middle of
the China US power struggle. Which way
it swings will have consequences far
beyond its borders.
Meet the Marcoses. This is former
President Ferdinand Marcos and his wife
and former first lady Alda Marcos, who
you may remember is quite the fan of
footwear. And this is their son,
Ferdinand Marcos Jr., also known as the
current president of the Philippines.
Now meet the Dutertes. This is Rodrigo
Duterte, another former president, and
his daughter Sar Duterte, the current
vice president of the Philippines, who
14 years ago fell out with the sheriff.
Problem is, President Marcos and Vice
President Duterte were a team, but now
they're at each other's throats and have
very different visions for their
country's foreign policy.
Marcos Jr., referred to as Bong Bong has
cultivated close ties with Washington.
While his political rival has followed
in her father's more pro-China
footsteps,
>> Sarah Duterte is trying to take a more
neutral stance to it. She wants to work
equally with both the US and China.
>> Any change in the direction of the
Philippines foreign policy stance will
have an impact not only here locally,
not only in Asia, but the world at
large.
>> And here's why. The Philippines was a US
colony till 1946.
Located just south of Taiwan, the island
chain is critical to the control of
waters off the southern coast of China.
Post pandemic, its economy has grown
steadily and faster than most of its
regional peers.
[Music]
>> The Philippines matters to the US as
it's among its allies that it uses to
secure trade routes and peace in the
region since World War II.
But relations between Washington and
Manila are caught up in the political
feud we mentioned earlier.
Marcos's term is due to end in 2028.
Duterte is emerging as his likely
successor. Their alliance was
extraordinary to begin with, but their
open hostility even more so. So, how did
things get so wild? And what can that
tell us about what to expect next?
Marcos Senior led the country for 21
years from 1965 to 1986. He and his wife
are accused of stealing 10 billion US
from the state during his term as well
as torturing and killing thousands of
political opponents. But to his
supporters, Marcos Senior was a hero who
drove the Philippines economic
development.
Former President Rodrigo Duterte served
from 2016 to 2022. He pivoted the
Philippines towards warmer ties with
China and away from the US. Currently,
he's in a prison cell in the Hague. More
on that later.
>> The alliance of these two prominent
families was a sure path to power,
uniting desperate factions of the
country into what they branded the uni
team.
In the 2022 presidential election,
Marcos and Duterte romped to victory.
>> So the 2022 elections is essentially a
coalition of convenience between two
political families harnessing the votes
from north and south of the country.
>> It did not take a long time before the
uni team showed problems.
>> Sara wanted the position of defense
secretary. She was given education and
things only got worse from there.
>> Her tenure within that department of
education started to show that there
were uh misuse of funds.
>> An allegation Sara denies. As part of
that investigation, a trusted aid of
Dutertes was detained. The vice
president decided to go live on Zoom.
His country is going to hell because we
are led by a person
who doesn't know how to be a president
and who is a liar.
>> Duterte claimed her life was under
threat and she had a contract killer
ready to assassinate the president if
she was killed.
>> Sarah Duterte is known as a feisty
personality here in the Philippines.
She's really not afraid to speak her
mind. But it was really shocking at that
time when you have a president and a
vice president who just a few years ago
were projecting an image of unity. And
here you have the vice president
declaring an assassination threat on the
president.
>> Is revenge from the grave a crime?
>> But the tensions between Marcos and
Duterte did not end there. In March this
year, Marcos government acted on an
arrest warrant issued by the
International Criminal Court against
Sarah's father, former President Rodrigo
Duterte.
>> He was charged by the International
Criminal Court with the murder of dozens
of alleged drug dealers, but human
rights groups say the victims number in
the thousands. He was flown to the
Hague.
But if this was supposed to hurt Sara,
it backfired. The Duterte land heavily
criticized this move. They portrayed
this as also a surrender of Philippine
sovereignty. So they said handing over
the former president to the ICC was
actually an act of kidnapping.
>> When kidnapping is allowed as a means of
acquiring the jurisdiction of the pews,
we think these two is a travesty of
justice.
Just as the president and vice president
split, so did their approach to foreign
relations.
>> Under Maros, the Philippines have
allowed the US to station more troops in
more locations under their treaty
agreements. There are now nine locations
in the Philippines, some of them very
close to Taiwan, some of them facing the
South China Sea that the US has access
to and rotate troops through that can
make investments that will have a
long-term presence.
>> Since Ferdinand Marcos came to power, he
has really shifted the relationship with
China and of course has moved much
closer to the US.
>> Sarah Duterte has been careful in
portraying herself as pro-China. There
is no reason for you to lean towards the
US.
You have to always stay in the middle
because you are not a part of the bigger
conflicts.
>> She has said that the relationship
between Beijing and Manila is not
defined entirely by their tensions in
the South China Sea.
>> And this is what those tensions look
like. This footage is shot from a
Filipino patrol ship being pursued by
two Chinese vessels. Then this happens.
>> The Chinese Navy vessel accidentally
smashes across the bow of its sister
ship. It's unknown if or how many
Chinese sailors lost their lives in this
collision. Philippine vessels have been
shown by authorities to have been water
cannon, sideswiped, harassed by Chinese
vessels. China and the Philippines
dispute who owns the islands and reefs
in the South China Sea. China's vast
claims are encompassed in what's known
as the 10 dash line, which sweeps down
from Taiwan to the Philippines,
Malaysia, and up Vietnam's coast.
Nobody agrees with this, including a UN
court that ruled in the favor of the
Philippines. Yet, China is pushing
fuller speed ahead with its insistence
that it has sovereignty over pretty much
the entire South China Sea.
>> China's rapidly expanding its navy and
rejects the UN court's ruling. It says
it's committed to upholding freedom of
navigation in the South China Sea. The
Philippines and its much smaller navy
are overmatched. The country's foreign
policy walks a tight rope with Marcos
and Duterte tugging in different
directions.
>> The country is very vulnerable to
Beijing's influence and without the US
there to back them, there's very little
they can do.
>> US security guarantees are the bedrock
of the Philippines maritime strategy.
But Trump's presidency is casting a
shadow on these ties.
The Philippines, just like any other
country basically in the world, is a
target of President Donald Trump's trade
anger and tariff wars.
>> Philippines exports to the US are being
hit with a 19% tariff. President Marcos
flew to meet President Trump in July
this year in the hope of getting a
better deal. It didn't help.
>> Marcos got stuck with the same rate as
everyone else did despite the fact that
they have opened up this access to US
defense. As Trump redefes America's role
in the world, nations like the
Philippines are left to wonder, can they
still rely on the US?
>> The US is losing its commitment to its
role as a peacemaker. And Trump is
saying these approaches to free trade
and alliances as more of a hindrance to
the United States.
>> Meanwhile, the feud between Duterte and
Marcos continues. Duterte has pulled off
an incredible reversal of fortunes,
avoided impeachment for threatening to
have the president killed, and
impeachment for alleged corruption.
She's now, with her more China friendly
policies, the most popular candidate to
be the next Philippine president.
>> After the arrest of her father, her
popularity started to increase again and
the ratings for Marcus started to
decline.
The Trump administration is exerting
economic pressure on its allies in the
region that could give the Philippines
more reason to lean away from the US.
[Music]
[Applause]